---
author: Shawna Gregory, Rachel Volentine, Candice Hopkins, Nicole Felts, and Jim Kreft
date: 2021-12-21
slug: user_wdfn
draft: True
type: post
title: Who Are Our "Users"?
categories: water-information 
tags:
  - water-data-for-the-nation
  - public-communication
image: static/plotFlowConc/unnamed-chunk-4-1.png
description: USGS Water Data products have many users. This post breaks down who uses USGS Water products and what data is available about those users.
keywords:
  - User research
  - User design
author_email: <wdfn@usgs.gov>
---

A kayaker rises before dawn. A parent prepares their children for a
drive into town over a ferocious river. A utility worker loads her truck
to perform repairs on a downed power line. A fisherman loads their boat
with gear for a long day. A retiree stares up at a darkening sky as a
storm approaches. What do they all have in common? They are all users of
USGS Water Data for the Nation products, and the next thing they will do
is head to our products to get water information essential to their
decision making.

Our team communicates a lot about [user
research](https://waterdata.usgs.gov/blog/18f-research/) and delivering
user-oriented products, but what do we really know about our users?
Let's dive into what we know and what we're still learning.

# We have lots of users 

We can tell how many people use our products by looking at combined
analytics for both our legacy and new webpages. In one year (October
2020 through September 2021), we had 64 million pageviews, which is
represented by 30 million unique visits by users. The analytics
indicated that 8.5 million of these users were new to our web products!
Once people find our pages, they come back again. Our users come back to
us several times a year, with the average user visiting our webpages
about 3.5 times a year.

Each person who uses our products is unique, and so the frequency of
their interactions with our products varies. In the graph below, you can
see that many users visited once or twice. The graph also shows there
are some users who visited over 200 times throughout the year! That
means those users on average are interacting with us at least multiple
times per week, if not every day.

<div>
{{< figure src="/static/user_wdfn/image1.png" caption= "A graph of the number of sessions for each users over Fiscal Year 2021" alt="A graph of the count of sessions for each user." >}}
</div>


Thousands of users also rely on [USGS's
Water](https://waterservices.usgs.gov/) Services. These tools allow
people to query our data uniquely, often in an automated way. We track
these users and the data that they download in logs, and we consider
their needs as we develop new software.

Our users are from all over the world

Although we primarily serve water data from the United States and
associated territories, analytics tell us that our webpages are visited
by people from all over the world. Most of our users are from the United
States, with the number of users varying by state. Figure 1 shows the
number of users by state, with California showing the largest number of
users in 2021, perhaps due to the historic drought in the state.

<div>
{{< figure src="/static/user_wdfn/image2.png" caption= "A map of the distribution of our users in Fiscal Year 2021" alt="A map of the distribution of users across the United States." >}}
</div>

# 

# Users Trust the USGS

Our users trust USGS to deliver highly accurate data and look to the
USGS as a leader in earth science data delivery. USGS data are
incorporated into countless programs and models that need the high level
of accuracy and precision offered by USGS data. Someone who uses
monitoring location pages because she lives in a floodplain says,
"\[USGS\] is really accurate. I really like it." Another user who uses
monitoring location pages for recreational fishing in the Mississippi
Gulf says, \"I'm very confident in what I'm seeing is what it actually
is. It is so seldom that \[the data\] is off. At my former job we said
we had 99.99% reliability and \[USGS\] accuracy is much better than
that." The accuracy of our data is of utmost importance to the USGS.
It's one of our core values as scientists and our field and laboratory
protocols ensure that we deliver quality data.

The real-time delivery of our data allows users to integrate UGSS data
into decision making activities. Sometimes this results in decision
makers using USGS data in times of emergency, such as flooding and
drought. Other times, our data can be used in monitoring of important
systems. A [recent news
article](https://helenair.com/news/state-and-regional/shaft-on-gate-broke-halting-water-flow-to-madison-river-volunteers-gather-to-rescue-fish/article_a05a8c5b-e83f-509d-8f78-183eaae65d77.html)
highlighted how our real-time monitoring helped save the lives of
thousands of fish when streamflow dropped to a dangerous level.

# How do we know who our users are?

We shape our understanding of our user base by compiling information
using several methods.

## Web Analytics

We rely on analytics to understand broader questions about our users.
This aggregated information allows us to answer quantitative questions,
like how many users visit our websites or how long people spend using
our products. We can also use analytics to dive into what type of
devices people use and how they navigate between pages on our website.
Web analytics also provides focus for our user research, as we try to
understand the motivations or thoughts behind an action.

**Analytics tell us what users do and our user research helps us
understand *why* they did something.**

## User research

We think about our users throughout the life of our products. Early in
our design process, we discover how to build our products by engaging in
interviews and activities in which users explore product prototypes.

As we build our products, we test the products' usability by asking
users to interact with them while we observe. We often start with our
own USGS Water Mission Area employees. Our internal colleagues often
access technology that's in development on our internal network,
providing feedback using their professional perspective. After that, it
is important we test with a wide variety of users to understand
different perspectives and use cases. We reach out to those people who
we expect to use our products, such as state agency cooperators,
academic researchers, and members of the general public.

During testing, we first ask users to tell us about their background and
role, and why they are using the product. Then we listen as users
explain their thought process while they navigate through our product.
We ask our users to complete specific tasks, such as downloading data or
answering questions about what the data is telling them.

User research is never done. We regularly evaluate our existing products
to make sure they continue to support user needs. If you'd be interested
in participating in our user research process, please email
<WDFN@usgs.gov> with the subject 'User Research' and we will add you to
our user roster.

## Real user engagement

Communicating with real people is the best way for us to understand who
our users are, what they want, and how they navigate through our
products. Users contact us via email through the Help Desk or the
feedback link on web pages. As a team, we respond to each email. In
addition to directly addressing each user's request or comment, we also
share existing blog posts, user testing opportunities, and other ways to
stay connected.

During our webinars, we dedicate about half the time to live questions
from the audience. We also offer audience members the opportunity to
participate in live polling. We will soon be releasing the first edition
of the new Water Data for the Nation newsletter. We love connecting with
our users over social media because it's so interactive. Check out our
[Instagram](https://www.instagram.com/usgs_streamgages/) and
[Twitter](https://twitter.com/USGS_Water).

# How do we organize our users?

With so many diverse users, how do we group our users to consider their
needs? Historically, we have grouped by professional title such as
Hydrographer or Water Manager. As we have learned more about our users,
we modified that approach to better meet user needs.

We use a simple organization based on a user's workflow needs. The two
main factors that go into a user's workflow are 1) the amount of data
needed, 2) the amount of supporting information for the data (also
referred to as *metadata*), and 3) the frequency of needing data.

Each user type can be described succinctly by their workflow, which
results in three user groups:

-   [**Operationalized
    Pull:**](https://waterdata.usgs.gov/blog/user_operational_pull/)
    These users pull data from multiple sources, including USGS
    Application Programming Interface (API) services, to use via custom
    dashboards and tools optimized for their location and needs.
    Operationalized Pull users, on average, use the most USGS water
    information, returning repeatedly for refreshed data to pull into
    their own systems.

-   [**Explore &
    Download**](https://waterdata.usgs.gov/blog/user_explore_download/):
    These users find nearby sites, exploring what data they collect.
    Users make ad-hoc or targeted queries to download, then alter the
    data as they need in their preferred tool (R, Excel, Python).
    Explore and Download users usually take their time exploring the
    data visually (maps, hydrographs, etc.) before finally downloading
    the data they find useful.

-   [**Check
    Status:**](https://waterdata.usgs.gov/blog/user_check_status/) These
    users perform routine checks of a few parameters for specific sites,
    primarily using the hydrographs. Check Status users are our largest
    user type by number of unique users. Each user generally looks at a
    handful of sites for the latest water conditions.

With these user groups, we can more accurately describe an ideal user
journey through our site by knowing which products they might find
inspiring to use and what their goal is on our site.

## What if I don't fall into just one user group?

Sometimes users fall into more than one user group based on their needs.
People with professional titles or technical skills can find themselves
in one or more categories depending on their current task. Similarly,
the public visits our website for many different reasons that span the
user groups such as to check levels surrounding a flood event or to
conduct research for a project or homework.

When we speak directly with users, they walk us through the ways they
currently use our data which helps us identify which user group(s) they
relate to. While these three user groups have helped us focus on
designing around a user\'s workflow, sometimes we need to consider other
important factors as well. We check in with user to understand their
familiarity with a scientific concept or the urgency which with they
need data. We'd love to hear your perspective on our data and ensure
we're meeting your needs. Please contact us at
[wdfn\@usgs.gov](https://doimspp.sharepoint.com/sites/gs-w-ocoo-iow/Shared%20Documents/General/IoW%20Team/IoW%20Product%20Owners/Blogs/wdfn@usgs.gov).
